it's another day at the Gwinnett County
Jail the summer heat takes its toll
a young woman tries to get her way
a mother and her husband are sentenced
to decades it's hard knowing that my son
is gonna be raised last very parents can
never win in there for a veteran inmate
counsels a newbie whether you're in jail
prison wherever you'd be in prison
within yourself on that call side
release for this inmate brings joy I'm
gonna be waving bye to everybody telling
them I will see them on the outside but
shortly after tasting freedom she finds
herself back in jail again of course I
felt it about an inch high
[Music]
deputies bring in Kimberly a wife and
mother she was arrested for possession
of methamphetamine with intent to
distribute originally arrested one year
ago she bonded out and was just
sentenced this morning to return to jail
her husband is already serving 25 years
for drug trafficking when I was riding
in the patrol car I looked out the
window and I knew and it could be the
last time I'd see outside for about two
years when I came in for intake
I just wanted to not upset
the deputies you know they have to be
tough
and they all think that were scum since
she came directly from court Kimberly is
dressed in her best suit is your mother
jacket and coffee she she was sentenced
to two years in prison one year of house
arrest and 12 years of probation
go ahead silver shoes back on the moment
that I was sitting I knew that it would
be the last time I'll be staying in
there as a free person I prepared to be
in handcuffs
Kimberly was also charged with intent to
distribute methamphetamines which is a
felony
could have been a lot worse I could have
been charged with trafficking
methamphetamine because of the amount
that I had but we did mines when he made
a deal with the state and they dropped a
to possession with intent I could have
been serving mandatory ten years in
prison
it's your hands before I was arrested a
year ago I've never been arrested before
in my life I've never been in trouble
with the law before had a clean record
listen better mean this very addictive
drug it's very dangerous I could say I
started using more often hanging out
with some people any kind of harm and
then I met my husband and he was
actually a dealer so once we started
dating each other it may get worse one
bad decision and I'm going to prison I'm
going to prison
a shower you don't want prepare panties
and three bras
all right ladies go to your left they on
the wall
it made me very angry to lose my husband
he abandoned us because he knew what he
was doing he was selling could land him
in prison and it did
Kimberly's two-year-old son has now lost
both of his parents ok ladies what I
need you to do is put your hands behind
your back stick to the right-hand side
of the wall I know I'm gonna be
emotional later but now it's not the
time to do it I'm just trying to be
brave and just trying to get through
this first part which is the worst part
I mean it's all scary it's all very
scary here's your room key I need to
pick up your bed in the corner I need
you to make up your bed into the next
shelf
I fear the other women I fear getting
jumped or robbed or beat up really
scared of the other females right now I
just got to try and be tough I guess
it's scary this is like
this is real I'll be sleeping here
tonight sucks
watch the ceiling okay okay
Oh
it's the first time I've like been in
any kind of private situation where I
can just cry I'm trying to like hold it
back all day it's just time it's not
gonna kill me
it's nothing they can do it's gonna kill
me just time I feel like this isn't real
like I can just leave and I can't I
can't just walk out of here who I want
to when I'm done with this I know I
gotta face it this is reality
this is my reality
[Music]
just my reality now
I disappointed myself I disappointed a
whole family
[Music]
in cellblock six deputies work around
the clock to maintain control
it's 2:00 a.m. and a woman in the
holding area is banging on the glass of
her cell and screaming the Rapid
Response Team is called into action
we're gonna make a surprise entry that
surprise injury is choreographed if
we're very good reason she's gonna be
totally shocked and surprised when his
team takes control of her
the hotshot a handheld defense tool
filled with compressed air and talcum
powder disorients the inmate
it's been really a great tool for us
with the women when they become really
emotional and out-of-control and we pop
this it seemed to change their channel
very quickly and then they get right out
of the fight I want you to watch very
carefully the communication between the
officers it's non verbal you won't hear
him say a thing how they're
communicating if you see him just
suddenly look over shoulder what he's
doing is he's calling up their strange
here okay why do we do that because
unless we say the more calming effect it
has on the person we're trying to
control so we have to make sure that
people handle with the minimum amount of
force but as much as it takes to control
that coming up I was just like really
crazy a girl makes one too many demands
not really a whiner but she was just
really snappy just really mean why
wasn't she asked in a nicer way come on
and when inmates least expected we'd
look weapons or drugs a cell search we
pat the inmates down head to toe we
search everything and later I have a
visit with my mom today a relationship
between a mother and her daughter you
can describe the love of a parent
through their child
[Music]
when I brought me here it was the
scariest thing ever
Kelly 24 was failing to pay her speeding
tickets they were really rude watching
the metal detector
[Music]
this will be a life altering experience
for me I don't think that I'll look at
police officers in the same way I'll
have a lot less respect for them because
of the way they treated me
it's just like really crazy and they
were not going to blink bring me like a
blanket or a sweatshirt and all that I'm
wearing a dress they wouldn't let me put
on a jumpsuit after two hours in the
holding cell Kelly is able to air her
grievances to captain Hicks the seat I'm
freezing cold is there any way I could
have a jumpsuit like the other girls
that came in with dresses like mine is
that we're actually not even as short as
mine did you ask for jumpsuit dad
Paquito jumpsuit but we're very busy we
treat somebody that's like you that's
here on a traffic charge just like
somebody that's here for murder
the people here were like colder to me
they were a lot ruder to me than when I
was like I don't know like a little more
bitchy I don't know what you mean by
removing clothes can you explain that
just like when I came in I was really
scared I was crying she said drop your
Kleenex in the trash can
I mean she could have just said you know
could you throw your Kleenex in the
trash can we walk we do these pictures
or whatever why wouldn't was it even an
issue that I had to shoot at my hand
why wasn't she asked in a nicer way to
throw away her tissue come on for me to
have a simple question there like while
she's putting on my wristband for me to
say how long does it generally take to
get it find it out they can't tell you
how fast you're gonna get in and get out
they don't know if we've had 1520 people
brought in or 60 or 70 she could answer
that in seconds you said I'm saying like
it's not that big of a deal I'm not
gonna whine about it I'm not really a
whiner but I just thought it was kind of
mean a few minutes later
Hicks responds to Kelly's request a
jumpsuit for this inmate over here for
her clothes because they're too smart
come this way
I'm saying everything off put your
jumpsuit on there's only one wrong and
challengers if anyone can leave my
clothes on like they did like they left
their clothes on rejected over to even
more have to take that off the junction
on just a combination book to if you can
keep your shoes ok I'm just going to put
this on okay
yeah after Kelly was pacified
she spent eight more hours in the
holding cell her mother reluctantly
bailed her out
[Music]
he'll drop on top cuz it doesn't take
but a drop when it goes makeup is
strictly forbidden in cellblock 6 but
Nicole who has been incarcerated for the
past nine months has found a new use for
colored pencils they work fabulous as
far as eyeliner mascara maybe being a
little eyebrows you can do lit wanna put
on yarns but I'll show you prior to her
recent incarceration for a robbery
charge Nicole served two and a half
years in prison for trafficking
methamphetamines I was addicted to the
money I made selling it I've never
really been addicted to methamphetamines
I am addicted to have a nice change
yeah the general rule is no wearing
makeup but of course we do it anyways
the moment I got arrested was the moment
I kicked to have it that's about just
that Nicole is on parole in connection
to a previous stay in prison the state
mandates that she remains in jail until
her parole board approves an address
that is deemed suitable for a convicted
felon
yesterday from dinner I came in and I
cried because I've been here nine months
I've been here two months that I didn't
have to be here but because they have a
process that they like to do it's on
their time not mine Nicole is still
waiting for a friend's address to be
approved so she can finally be released
the worst part about jail is the waiting
waiting to see if you're actually gonna
be indicted or not that you're waiting
for maybe a bond hearing are you waiting
to see how much time you're gonna get
I'm waiting to see the judge I'm waiting
on trial I'm waiting to go to court
waiting to be sentenced wait for meals
to come waiting for hours wait for them
down lock the doors waiting waiting and
waiting it's important to have a job
especially you're doing time because
makes your time go faster it's not slow
dragging it's actually moving
it's just something different to do
while I'm waiting
trying to be patient but I can't wait
it's visitation time in cellblock six
and Nicole is anxious to get her friend
Jackie signed in okay here's Kevin
Jacqueline is it all right Thank You Man
I'll get it I can fly I'm so looking
bored so see my friend and finding out
what parole had to say to her about me
getting out so hopefully I'll be gone
soon
I'm looking to go home any day now I'm
just waiting for my dress to be approved
and I can go hey hey alright so what a
parole thing I talked to her she said my
address got approved oh my god
oh my god some way to prove they're
supposed to be releasing you immediately
I've never been here before went through
this verse I'm not quite sure what the
processes Sam colleges on the property
row and you can go upstairs pack
everything you will be released
Oh
I've been hearing with nine and a half
months and um it's a awesome to be
leaving it is it's unreal it's surreal
I'm gonna be waving bye to everybody and
telling them I will see them on the
outside
I'm getting out and I'm going through my
friends and I have a job lined up
already and then I'm also getting my
back into college just as soon as I can
but baby I love you bye didn't expect
you to hear quite this long but
great awesome nervous excited all the
above I want to scream that I'm in the
hallway
[Music]
it feels great to have jeans on after
9/11 moans I'm so over this place
I'm mentally and emotionally drunk I'm
ready to go did what I did in my life
and I've chosen to do what I've done in
my life throughout my life now I'm gonna
choose the right way you're the burn
because now I know the consequences of
when you don't
coming up go and visit my mom and my son
and have my dope in my crack pipe on me
and everything how drugs separated this
mother from her child not tell my mom I
wish I could say but I couldn't I had to
go get her and later
Nicole promised she would never return
to jail she failed to keep that promise
so I'm here again I mean of course I
felt about an inch high
[Music]
part of life in cellblock 6 are the 12
random cell and bin searches that occur
every day our cell searches are for
safety reasons and to make sure that
these inmates are following our rules
you don't have your bin out your bidipi
out with the top off is going inside the
bed we look for any kind of contraband
that could be weapons or drugs but it
could also be something that is being
used for something it's not intended for
when we go into a cell we Pat the
inmates down head to toe we search
pockets under garments we search
everything we search their bins which is
basically just a big plastic container
and they keep all their personal
belongings in it clothing items food
items underneath bunks underneath
mattresses underneath the sink that sell
from top to bottom is search for any
kind of contraband and its address
whether it's minor or large
[Music]
while women inmates are incarcerated for
an array of charges many of them have
one thing in common do you have any
tattoos each of them are located where
they are they look just mine everything
from the crease right side we take
pictures of tattoos scars birthmarks
identifiers if they become fugitives
then we can readily identify them from
someone who might have a twin or you
have someone who looks like you the
reason I ask what tattoos you have is to
make sure that this is the person that I
have in my system already and for future
confirmation if you ever come back in
here straight ahead there's I got this
tattoo right here because I still like
to look in the mirror when I get high so
every time I look in the mirror I've
seen my son's name
Tasha 25 has been in jail nine times in
the past five years
just remind me about a little boy and
what I'm doing in the street leaving him
back at home
she is currently serving time for
violating probation on a drug possession
charge I didn't really know I had a
problem until I had my son cuz I
couldn't stop I tried you know I would
go and visit my mom and my son and have
my dope in my crack pipe on me and
everything and I tell my mom I wish I
could stay but I couldn't I had to go
get high
Tasha is on a waiting list for a major
drug rehabilitation program
she's already waited in jail for four
months
being in here I don't have to worry
about Pam doesn't have to worry about
finding a job I have to work out you
know temptation of getting high I don't
have to worry about nothing in here but
to go step outside I'm actually gonna
have to face the world you know and
that's scary the time sucks but I needed
[Music]
if I could get out today I probably mess
up because I'm not ready and I know that
four months isn't enough time
and si Tasha is a part of the inmate
worker unit today a van will transport
her to the local recycling plant where
she will spend the next eight hours
sorting trash
we call points sometimes twice a week
because we don't never know who exactly
would stay going work
we pull out all the like clear bottles
that anything that says pee or what's
the number two number two we pull all
those out and separate them from the
other bottles for recycling
[Music]
upon our return to the jail Tasha and
the other workers are told to prepare
for dinner
but after working all day at the
recycling plant
Tasha wants a shower not a meal
right now
I'm mad right now man we've been working
on a Don sample take a shot and making a
scene while we got to eat I had someone
said I'm not sure he can I just take a
shot we said nah we just eat I'm in jail
I can't even nightshirt all of the whole
night
thank you I'm good finally after a long
day of work Tasha gets her shower
right now I'm in the process of writing
the story moment
starting from age 16 when I first got
into drug addiction to where I am and
why not saying it's very hard cuz each
little piece of my life is something I
haven't dealt with yet or something that
I've forgotten or you know I'm having to
go back and remember all these things
that I try to put off for so long it's
opening wounds and I'm actually feeling
the pain crying it out instead of
getting high and running from me
I wonder what's like on that side to
actually have a job have a home and I
come home to and I have to worry about
getting beat up but the polies kicking
my door in you're on saying it's gonna
take time to desert alone anything's
possible
coming up 368 dollars is all she needs
to become a free woman but no one will
come to bond her oh I hate it I hate
what we get closing I hate the door when
it closes
I hate being here
[Music]
you
I don't want to be here in the next
three years I don't want to be here in
the next three months it's time for me
to grow up
Janis 27 has been in and out of jail on
multiple misdemeanor charges the most
important thing that I've learned during
my time here in jail is how important my
daughter really is to me home is with my
daughter wherever she's at that's home
this last incident I've learned that I
need to stop drinking even though I've
quit doing drugs meth crank each time
I've quit one I've picked up another
[Music]
today she's on work detail considered a
privilege by many inmates because for
them it breaks up the monotony of the
day the biggest size we have is a 10x as
you can see I can use it for tips I
requested to be in the workers unit
because I knew that I wouldn't have to
be locked down in the room all day when
I have to be locked down in the room all
day that's when I start feeling caged in
[Music]
I'm doing work just like I do on the
outside I would work and I actually
enjoy it
Janice has been in and out of jail
several times most recently for a DUI at
a detention center in a neighboring
County the women there were a lot
rougher than what they are here they
tried to claim me and I rebelled of
course and I cut my hair they told the
guard I had lice so they shaved the back
of my head I had long blonde curly hair
and blonde is my natural color when I
got out they had shaved completely the
whole back of my head I think today I'm
going to read it out keeping peace and
guided Janis claims her troubles began
at age 10 when she was molested
not as happy in Dali as I normally am at
15 she got pregnant and ever since she
has raised her daughter alone since I've
been in jail for past three and a half
weeks I've written my daughter twice
while Janice is in jail her daughter is
being cared for by relatives and I
haven't received a letter back it does
hurt me but in the same sense I have to
understand that she's upset with me she
wants me to be there for her that's all
she wants she's 11 years old and she's
fully developed and it's one of the
things I got to make sure that I'm there
for her is that nothing happens to her
like they happen to me
to keep her mind off her daughter and
her life of freedom janice finds
different ways to stay occupied i went
out because it keeps me fit it takes
away a lot of the stress and when i
can't lay down feeling rest my spies how
i get done working out i want to lay
down and it kills the time too because
being isolated in here I hate it I hate
when we get closed in here I hate the
door when it closes I hate the sound I
hate being in here
I really do so working out helps me cook
with it
it does
[Music]
Janice has no one to put money in her
account for the jail store where inmates
can buy extras like cigarettes when the
girls go out the smoke they have their
shorts before they put them out I asked
them for the cigarette so I collect them
and put them in here and I break them
apart and reroll them and I end up with
a whole cigarette having to smoke the
shorts because I don't get full
cigarettes all the time it turns my
fingers yellow I'm always having to wash
my hands and I have to constantly rub my
fingers on the wall to get this yellow
stain out so it doesn't look very
finiman like many women here Janice does
not have the money to pay her bond all
she needs is 368 dollars to be released
desperate she calls her ailing
grandfather I was wondering if you can
do me a favor do you think you can help
me get out my bond is like 368 I'll pay
like I can pay you soon as I get out huh
no how are you doing anyways are you
still doing the chemo yeah I still got
mail came up grandpa
um I have to go okay okay brother right
Mike she then tries to friend she met in
Gwinnett a few weeks earlier hey Rebecca
is Janice hey your mom yesterday
you talked to my mom yesterday we she's
a bigger brother we're gonna get you out
you know which one it is it's probably
my little brother than it's my rank
thank you so you are of course I am I
know it's gonna be okay I know it you're
the first what oh my gosh and to know
that my family's gonna help me out at
the same time oh my gosh
God I definitely answered my prayer did
one out that hours are good this is the
first time my family has really tried to
help me get with anything
I've been struggling so hard on my own
and it's about time I'm Molly thousand
what I wanted to help me and it feels
great but Genesis hopes were quickly
dashed her friends and family never came
to bail her out she spent two more
months in jail and was released for time
served
you have anything on e that will poke
you sting me you're coming Kimberly just
began serving a two-year sentence for
possession of methamphetamines after
being booked dressed out and spending
her first nights in jail away from her
son Kimberly volunteered for the workers
unit
so I came over here got in the orange I
went to work about five days later while
Kimberly waits to be transferred to
prison the laundry provides a
distraction for her constant thoughts
about home sometimes I feel like I'm
cracking up a little bit I cry myself to
sleep every night cuz I miss my son
families but there are breaks in the
repetition and loneliness after work
Kimberly has a visitation I have a visit
with my mom today their first visit I'm
excited I'm nervous too I hope she's not
upset or I don't know how she's gonna
act she seems fine on the phone
okay how are you I miss you I miss y'all
my mom is very supportive I know I had
one year clean on Friday that was a long
one after I got arrested for possession
of methamphetamine when I went to a
treatment center my parents were always
there you can't describe the love of a
parent through their child with
Kimberly's husband now in prison for
methamphetamine trafficking that love
now extends to her son as Kimberly's
mother raises her two-year-old child
how's the baby the baby's doing he's
okay is he calling out for me show your
picture one who you are I'm saying
the sidewalk was he saying his colors
you say yeah all I can do is just stay
in contact with my parents and know what
he is doing what he's learning and when
I get out
he's my way back into his life and
rebuild our bond
Breanna tell me mom I hate all the same
time as rebels no he says you gave her I
can't really do much from jail because
he can't see you know he can't touch me
I feel like his little hearts breaking
because I'm not there and that breaks my
heart
coming up a veteran in I know a
community help somebody else teaches the
ropes to a newbie it's my first time
being in trouble like this everything
inside these walls is unknown to me I
know since I've been here that they
could be overwhelming I just pray that
this will be a learning experience
[Music]
another inmate is now arriving at the
Gwinnett County Jail never been to jail
it's my first time being in trouble like
this so I don't know everything inside
these walls is unknown to me
sable is a 22 year old mother she was
just sent to jail by her probation
officer for failing a routine drug test
do you have anything on you that will
put me sleepy your head
fucking shoes drugs or new contraband I
didn't have maybe that parental guidance
that some children have or what some
people may deem as what a prayer beads
going walk through that metal detector
when I first got here I was emotional
because I was brought here without being
able to say goodbye to my son
to know that at the end of the day I'm
not there for my son it makes me feel
less of a mother I'm not the one feeding
my son I'm not the one changing his
diapers I can't hold them
[Music]
he's here right hand I'm a shit man
yes I can stay here and say I'm so
accountable and yeah I smoke and I don't
think nothing's wrong with it at the end
of the day smoking marijuana has taken
me from my son
all right ladies around your home with
ec145 I have to see to the Blue Chair I
don't want to be that typical young
mother who is always in and out of jail
and still wanting to party party beyond
I'm young and I had a son and now it's
time for me to own up and be that mature
responsible mother that I'm supposed to
be these stairs the first door make a
few bad you yeah I don't know what to
expect I just pray that this will be a
learning experience I may need somebody
in there who will be a lifelong friend
of mine there may be a life changing
person or experience I don't know what's
behind those doors
and lucky for sable her cell mate his
Audrey archers been here probably for
almost about a year she's one of the
ones that stays under the radar she kind
of came in already with the
understanding that what she did she did
and I think she has done her time very
well with that when I got here I said I
knew I had to be here so I said I'm not
gonna wrestle with it I'm not gonna
fight with it let me sit for one after
living a life of crime audrey has now
chosen to help other inmates to guide
them to mentor them and to mother them
lots of girls come here and I know since
I've been here that it could be
overwhelming for them
I know Malcolm here to help somebody
else who might have went down same path
[Music]
my mother of three and I have a lot to
offer the ladies here and the white she
goes on first that what she was offering
you got two sheets and they both the
same what's that like here the square
were you make the two people that's in
here just like the people in the
hillside you have to build in the bed we
look at it a time away from whenever you
was doing a time here when you can sit
and get your mind together but you got
to find it in you to try to hold on you
no matter what situation whether you're
in jail prison wherever you'd be
imprisoned within yourself on the
outside you just have to learn to adjust
to it knowing that this is not well
didn't take it day by day or right now
minute by minute and just see how it
goes but I can and I can do it
[Music]
coming up after her release I'm doing
everything that society says I'm
supposed to do Nicole is back I've got a
job I've been enrolled in college just
when I'm getting ahead I get sent back
behind my name is Sam Hayes and I'm
working inmate services here when Eddie
Detention Center I'm teaching a class
and abroad alcohol relapse prevention
today the inmates of cellblock 6 have
gathered to support the 11 women who
completed the jail's drug rehabilitation
class one of those women is Laura
it's a very intense class and he makes
you even dig deep into what what
happened as a child an admitted
prostitute and crack addict
Laura considers herself a career
criminal out of the last 26 years of my
life I've spent the last 23 incarcerated
she is currently serving time for a
robbery charge and has been incarcerated
for over a year
my head's been so messed up for so long
I don't even know what it's like to be
normal when the pencils get really small
my drug of choice is crack cocaine and I
relapsed thirteen months ago
once you smoke it it's like a stronghold
so darkness can't get away from what
we've got to do is find some reason for
us to want to care about ourselves I
took mr. Hays drug and alcohol class
voluntarily
the difference in all the other times is
I didn't want to change I didn't care
but I care now and I want to change
we're never the same person we were
changing and growing all the time yes
ma'am
when you're a drug addict you're used to
doing drugs and you gotta learn to live
without doing drugs again it's a whole
different style of living it's a whole
different style of living can I live can
I live this one Laura shares her free
time with Sharon the two have crossed
paths in jail and on the streets for
over two decades
Abby where is the one that I like the
best well I wouldn't worry time out the
other one
we known each other for 20 years it's
totally different than any time that
we've been together before I mean you
talk positive things but we've always
fell back into the same old pattern you
know but this time I believe in you and
I believe it's gonna work what is this
he doing the best friend one of the self
talks you taught us but what adults
present that do we all wrote you
something on the back so if you look
back a few fish this is great I am a
child of God and a person of word I
appreciate that very much
we aren't going to go on and give out
the certificates today I would now like
to recognize women who have completed
their course with a certificate
[Applause]
I'm very proud of myself cuz I've never
finished anything a story I finish this
her conversation is totally different
this time
then it's never been before she talks
about positive things things that she
wants to do when she gets out this
that's totally different character all
together
[Applause]
two months after her release Nicole is
back in jail so I'm here again I come
back here to the jail and I see an
officer that I was in the doorman she
said oh that didn't take long and I'm
going yeah you know something of course
I felt about an inch high after two
months of freedom
Nicole violated her parole when police
found illegal prescription drugs in her
home
when I'd actually turn myself in to my
parole office I was crying they arrested
me there
that was my actual realization of not
only did I know I have a problem I was
actually ready to work with my problem
I've gotten a job I've been enrolled in
college I'm doing everything that
society says I'm supposed to do but at
the same note something always happens
it seems like it was just like a no-win
situation
I was doing good was I heard her to get
a new car I did it got your job got a
job this end that roll to college for
welding yeah yeah just when I'm getting
ahead I get sent back behind I'm sorry
to see you back yeah this sucks not want
to be here my life has never been
planning for me to come in and out of
jail in and out of jail
you